EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY AND RESPONSE PLAN
IsraAID strategies, vision, mission
Country Profile
Geographic conditions of the Dominica
Dominica is distinctive in many ways. The country has one of the most rugged landscapes in the Caribbean, covered by a largely unexploited, multi-layered rain forest. It is also among the earth's most rain-drenched lands, and the water runoff forms cascading rivers and natural pools. The island, home to rare species of wildlife, is considered by many as a beautiful, unspoiled tropical preserve.
EARTHQUAKE
Dominica lies between the iso-acceleration lines representing 250 gals [4] and 300 gals. These are peak ground accelerations with a probability of non-exceedance of 90% in 50 years. The Caribbean Uniform Building Code (CUBiC), which is incorporated in the Dominica Building Code [5], assigns a zone factor (Z) of 0.75 to Dominica. Both of these references indicate a serious earthquake hazard for Dominica.
VOLCANIC ACTIVITY
Several of the islands of the Eastern Caribbean are volcanic in origin. The volcanoes there are considered to be either active or dormant. Dominica exhibits volcanic activity. This, however, is outside the scope of this report.
TSUNAMI
Tsunami travels at an average velocity of 500 to 600 kilometers per hour rising to A tsunami a maximum of 800 km/h. Therefore within one hour of a major occurrence at Kick 'em Jenny (just north of Grenada), many of the islands of the Dominica will be affected,
HURRICANE
The destructive potential of a hurricane is significant due to high wind speeds and torrential rains that produce flooding and occasional storm surges with heights of several feet above normal sea level.
TORRENTIAL RAINS
Although hurricanes are often accompanied by heavy rains, severe rainfall events resulting in flooding are also, and frequently, associated with troughs and tropical depressions. The risk of flooding is therefore not restricted to, nor more likely to occur, during hurricane events.
Country Office Profile
Office Conditions Of ISRAAID Dominica
RISK PROFILE AND MANAGEMENT CHART
Risk treatment can take the following forms:
• reduce or modify the hazard
• modify behavior
• reduce or modify vulnerability
• risk transfer of financial consequences to another party
• accept risk and plan for response and recovery.
Scenarios:
EARTHQUAKE:
TSUNAMI
INTRUDERS
FIRE
Break-IN
Levels of emergency
Level one Emergency –Localized emergencies
Level two Emergency –emergencies that overwhelm the capacity of the district administration to manage the situation
Level three emergency- A large scale disaster that calls for a response beyond the resources of the provincial government
OFFICE RESPONSE
Capabilities assessment
Response Team
Disaster Field Operation- Sawana Fabien
CERT- Urma Longe
Roles and responsibilities in case of an emergency
Incident Commander- Paul Norris
•	Activate the Emergency Response team
•	Activate additional response contractors and local resources
•	Evaluate the Severity, Potential Impact, Safety Concerns, and Response Requirements based on the initial information provided by the First Person On-Scene
•	Confirm safety aspects at site, including need for personal protective equipment, sources of ignition, and potential need for evacuation
•	Communicate and provide incident briefings to company superiors, as appropriate
•	Coordinate/complete additional internal and external notifications
•	Communicate with Emergency Response Team, as the situation demands
Resources assessment
Office Readiness Supplies:
Fire Extinguishers 2
First Aid Kit - 2 kits
Thermometer
Trauma Pack w/ Quick Clot
Tourniquet
Dust Masks - 8 boxes
Work gloves (polytril) 12 pair
Hard Hats - 3
Crowbar
Nylon Rope - 2
Garbage Bags -
Office Security Bag:
Portable fm/am radio
Whistle
Leather work gloves
Hazard tape
Multitool
Glowstick
Zip ties
Aqua tabs
Shelter Emergency Items:
Binoculars
Megaphones
Transistor Radio
Batteries
Solar Lantern
Solar Motion Sensor Lights
Fire Extinguisher
Gas Container - 5 Gal
Water Carrier - 8 Gal
Sawyer Water Filtration Bucket
Solar Powered Fridge System
Solar Generator w/ lights
220V Extension Chord
Shovel
Nylon Rope - 15m
Machete & File
Work gloves
Multipurpose Tools
Air Mattress - Queen Size
Towels
Personal Hygiene Items
Hand Sanitizer
Bottled Water
Canned Food Items
First Aid Response Items
Trauma Pack with Quik Clot
Tourniquet
Medications
Satellite Phones
Go-Bags: (whistle, Dominica Survival Plan Map, glowstick, dust masks,)
Communication strategy : call tree (whatsapp)
Country Director- Hannah Gaventa
Security and Compliance Director- Dima Motel
Regional Director- Michal Strahilevitz
Security/ Procurement Manager- Paul Norris
Admin Manager
Accounts manager
Shelter Plan
Courtesy Apartment- Hannah’s Residence
In the event of emergency scenario where the IsraAID Roseau office is inaccesbile, the IsraAID staff members will convene at the team Shelter, at Courtesy Apartments in Goodwill.
Gender action plan
RESPONSE PROTOCOL
Fire, Earthquake, Tsunami
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE IN CASE OF A NATIONAL DISASTER
Monitoring
Make sure that team is safe
Alert to HQ ?
Give instructions to the team
Comunication to HQ
Local Assesment meeting-----
comunication to HQ
Decide the type and level of emergency
Asign resources
Start field response
WHERE WILL THE RESPONSE BE?
Where can we work?
Consider places where IsraAID is already working. Make a table with possible people and infrastructure affected
Prepared formats or templates ready to be used to formulate projects
Partnerships or alliances: consider agencies or organizations who we can work with
Make a list of the team we will need to response
List of persons who we can call to work with us
List of vendors (products and services, food, NFI, transportation, etc. or pay in advance)
Budget
To Make Before:
Action plan: to implement preventive measures.
Anti-slip tape on the stairs, extinguisher, etc.
Office plan and evacuation route plan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
STEPS TO ELABORATE THE CONTINGENCY AND RESPONSE PLAN
Assessment of hazards and resources (Make asses and prepare specific scenarios and levels of emergency)
Make the plans (document with action steps, protocols, flujograma of response, emergency alert format, etc)
Strategy of country office response (where and how we will response)
Action plan: Take prevention or preparation actions
Disseminate information
Drills
Hazard Identification | Likelihood | Consequences | Priority
Natural | Natural | Natural | Natural
Hurricanes
Floods
Earthquakes
Tsunami
Technological | Technological | Technological | Technological
Fire
Intruder
Utility failure - Electricity
Utility failure - Water
Utility failure- Communications
Biological | Biological | Biological | Biological
Infection Human disease, outbreaks
SCENARIO 1 | North | South
Area | Portsmouth | Point Mitchel
Stimated population | 5000 | 8000
Number of beneficiaries | 1000 | 1200
Work sectors | WASH | EDUCATION
xxx water
safe water kits
Food
NFI
medicines | xx temporary schools
materials
water
Position | Requirements | duration
Team leader
Logistic
Comunication officer
specialist